README.md, before:

# MJT Typescript Monad

Some simple and handy things for creating / working with
[Monads](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monad_(functional_programming)>) in
Typescript

## Why?

This module is half learning exercise / half opinions of how I want these things
to behave in my Typescript environment.

Like a Jedi having to craft his own lightsaber, it seems those who go down the
FP path must at some point craft the classic Monads for themselves.

## Warning

There are many libraries for dealing with javascript in an FP way. I would
highly recommend checking those out for 'production work'.

Feel free to inspect this code and use if desired, however note that I will
certainly update this project without warning as my knowledge/opinions change.

This is a 'working' module (module I include in my work) which does not attempt
to follow any rules regarding semver. _I_ trust it but make no guarantees.

## Lessons Learned

- Promise is the primary 'Monad' in the Javascript ecosystem
- If one tries to make monads outside of the Promise one is in for some 'nested
  Monad hell'
- If one tries to _extend_ promises the hell is less but then one is left with a
  Promise that the user should not use (data inside effectively becomes
  'private') which causes issues since it is a Promise but 'then' produces odd
  results.
- Optional is just a stripped down version of Either

# Questions

- What if I hide the promise as internal state of the Monads I create?
  - might give a cleaner api to the created Monads

## Clarity on what I really want

- Promises promote async await behavior that I consider harmful and so I'm
  attempting to _hide_ promises behind a layer of abstraction more to my liking

## Is this a good idea?

- Perhaps what is wanted is merely better 'operational semantics' for Promises
  - Promise.all 'do' syntax

## Nad

[Nad](./Nad.ts) is a Mo*nad* with an internal hidden promise and more functional
(value-oriented) style error-handling.

## License

MIT

## Blame

Matt Taylor https://mjt.dev

Commit message:

Code works. Don't anticipate going forward with this module. See README. Marked as Abandoned in Place

README.md, after:

# MJT Typescript Monad

Some simple and handy things for creating / working with
[Monads](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monad_(functional_programming)>) in
Typescript

## Why?

This module is half learning exercise / half opinions of how I want these things
to behave in my Typescript environment.

Like a Jedi having to craft his own lightsaber, it seems those who go down the
FP path must at some point craft the classic Monads for themselves.

## Warning

There are many libraries for dealing with javascript in an FP way. I would
highly recommend checking those out for 'production work'.

Feel free to inspect this code and use if desired, however note that I will
certainly update this project without warning as my knowledge/opinions change.

[Abandoned in Place](#abandoned-in-place) ~~This is a 'working' module (module I
include in my work) which does not attempt to follow any rules regarding semver.
_I_ trust it but make no guarantees.~~

## Lessons Learned

- Promise is the primary 'Monad' in the Javascript ecosystem
- If one tries to make monads outside of the Promise one is in for some 'nested
  Monad hell'
- If one tries to _extend_ promises the hell is less but then one is left with a
  Promise that the user should not use (data inside effectively becomes
  'private') which causes issues since it is a Promise but 'then' produces odd
  results.
- Optional is just a stripped down version of Either

# Questions

- What if I hide the promise as internal state of the Monads I create?
  - might give a cleaner api to the created Monads

## Clarity on what I really want

- Promises promote async await behavior that I consider harmful and so I'm
  attempting to _hide_ promises behind a layer of abstraction more to my liking

## Is this a good idea?

- Perhaps what is wanted is merely better 'operational semantics' for Promises
  - Promise.all 'do' syntax

## Nad

[Nad](./Nad.ts) is a Mo*nad* with an internal hidden promise and more functional
(value-oriented) style error-handling.

## Thoughts After Experimentation

- I'm glad I went through this challenge as I feel I now have a clearer idea of
  how Functors and Monads work _under the hood_.
- Abstractions need to be useful enough to carry their own weight and provide
  additional benefits
- Tacking abstractions like Reader, Either, or Maybe _on top of_ Promises adds
  more weight than I think provide benefit
  - Use _undefined_ instead of Maybe Monad
  - Use tuple with first value being the 'right' value for Either/Exception
    Monad
  - Not sure I understand Reader enough to know if I was 'doing it right'. In my
    experiments it appeared to _hide_ the dependency a bit too well and created
    confusion. Perhaps it is due more to my history of c-like languages, I don't
    _expect_ dependencies to be asked for _later_ and so forget.
- Overall I would currently proscribe sticking with the natural 'Monad-likes' of
  Promises and Arrays in a Javascript/Typescript environment. They aren't
  perfect, but they have the overwhelming advantage of not needing a new
  Abstraction layer being 'imported', and therefore will stay 'in style' for
  longer.

## Abandoned in Place

- I don't anticipate using this module myself going forward. Leaving as a
  reminder to myself for future reference, and to serve as an example to others
  who might be traveling a similar path.

## License

MIT

## Blame

Matt Taylor https://mjt.dev
